# Specify and run IRT models from R (using Conquest, TAM, or mirt), including equating methods and parameter transformation.

The software Conquest (Wu, Adams, Wilson, & Haldane, 2007) is a computer
program for fitting item response and latent regression models. It is
based on the Multi-dimensional mixed-Coefficients Multinomial Logit
Model, which is a generalized form of the Rasch Model (Adams & Wu,
2007). For example, Conquest allows for the estimation of the Rasch
model, the rating scale model, the partial credit model, the linear
logistic test model, multifacet models, multidimensional and latent
regression models.

Like Mplus, the interface of Conquest in its version 2.0 is command-line
(cmd) based, where the syntax, the data and fixed effects indicator
names (i.e., names of items) have to be provided in separated ASCII
files. The package `eatModel` was originally created to allow for more
fail-save, less cumbersome specification of IRT models in R, which
subsequently can be estimated in Conquest. The package translate model
specification and data from R into Conquest input syntaxes and
re-imports Conquest output to R. At the heart of the package are several
functions, which build on each other and should be called consecutively.
Not every function is mandatory to be called—it depends on the desired
analyses.

- [`splitModels`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/splitModels.md)
  is only necessary if the user wants to estimate several IRT models in
  a row, using only one function call. This might be useful, if, for
  example, one model should be fitted separately in various person
  groups, for example the federal states in Germany, or if one
  (unidimensional) model should be fitted separately for several domains
  (i.e., item groups), say listening comprehension and reading
  comprehension. Hence, the split may be defined according to person
  groups (federal states, for example), or item groups (domains) or
  both. If only one model should be defined and estimated, calling
  `splitModels` is not necessary and may be skipped. Start directly with
  [`defineModel`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/defineModel.md)
  instead. Hence, you may think of
  [`splitModels`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/splitModels.md)
  as predefining a loop, like
  [`lapply`](https://rdrr.io/r/base/lapply.html) or
  [`by`](https://rdrr.io/r/base/by.html).

- [`defineModel`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/defineModel.md)
  is used to specify the model and the analysis software (e.g., Conquest
  or TAM) as well as the data. Several consistency checks are performed
  and all required input for the estimation software is prepared. If
  several models should be estimated in a row,
  [`defineModel`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/defineModel.md)
  needs the output from
  [`splitModels`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/splitModels.md).
  The variety of models that can be specified with defineModel is
  significantly reduced compared to specifying the models directly in
  TAM.

- [`runModel`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/runModel.md)
  needs the output generated by
  [`defineModel`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/defineModel.md)
  and simply starts the ‘estimator’ (e.g. Conquest, TAM, or mirt)

- [`getResults`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/getResults.md)
  needs the output generated by
  [`runModel`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/runModel.md)
  and re-collects all created model output which is represented then in
  a single R data frame. The aim of the function is to provide the model
  output in a consistent framework which is independent from the
  software used for analysis. Strictly speaking,
  [`getResults`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/getResults.md)
  isn't necessary, i.e. the user is free to work with the output
  provided by Conquest or TAM directly.

- [`equat1pl`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/equat1pl.md)
  needs the output generated by
  [`getResults`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/getResults.md).
  It provides equating in a one-parameter (1pl) context, accounting for
  linking DIF and a clustered structure of items (items nested in
  testlets). In the multiple model case (i.e., if
  [`splitModels`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/splitModels.md)
  was called), the linking is executed for all defined models
  simultaneously.

- [`transformToBista`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/transformToBista.md)
  needs the output generated by
  [`equat1pl`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/equat1pl.md).
  It provides transformation of item and person parameters to an
  arbitrary scale (for example the “PISA”-metric or the metric of the
  german educational standards).

The multi-stage process of model estimation works for one single model
as well as for a compilation of several models in only one call. The
estimation of these models may be accelerated using multicore
processing. Depending on the number of available logical CPUs and
working memory (RAM), several models may be estimated simultaneously.
The function
[`splitModels`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/splitModels.md)
allows to allocate the analyses to several cores. See the examples of
[`splitModels`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/splitModels.md)
for further details. The help page of
[`defineModel`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/defineModel.md)
includes a variety of examples which are derived from the context of the
“IQB Laendervergleich” studies.

Basically, `eatModel` is useful for Conquest analyses which are called
from R. Alternatively, the R packages `TAM` and `mirt` allow to estimate
parameters of a variety of IRT models in an R environment. `eatModel`
allows all models to be estimated in `TAM` or `mirt` likewise. The
`software` argument in the
[`defineModel`](https://weirichs.github.io/eatModel/reference/defineModel.md)
function allows to choose the desired software. Please note that some
model specifications (for example, 2pl/3pl) lead to models only TAM is
able to estimate. Conversely, some other model specifications (for
example, partial credit models with many categories or differential item
functioning) might be unstable in TAM.

Historically, `eatModel` is a ‘reboot’ of the package `eatRest` formerly
known as `eat`. The first development of some of its main functions
started loosely in autumn 2009 at the Institute of Educational Progress
(IQB). For the first time, any attempts to develop an R package were
neither made nor intended. (Besides, no one knew how to do this.) The
functions existed only in some ASCII files which were loosely scattered
across the IQB computers. As part of the gradual switchover from SPSS to
R which has taken place at the IQB, the package `eat` (“Educational
Assessment Tools”) was set up to bundle all functions which were
developed by then. A gentle group that called itself “Central
coordination of data analysis” (ZKD) claimed responsibility for these
courses of action. This group's endeavors were driven by the burning
desire to standardize assessment procedures between different projects
across the IQB. The “Laendervergleich 2011” was the first study where
`eat` has been used intensely. In 2012, during ZKD's first period of
prosperity, the variety of the `eat` functionality has been grown and
was therefore partitioned into several small “sub packages”—by name
`eatPrep` for data preparation, `eatTools` for several auxiliary
functions, `eatRest` for Rasch modeling, `eatRep` for replication
methods, `eatDesign` for definition and modification of design
properties. The further development of `eatRest` was expired because the
package turned out to be enigmaticly written which led to undebugable
problems, especially with the ardently loved results structure. ZKD
authors did not understand any longer the code which has been written
before. Thus, `eatModel` is the second attempt, launched in summer 2014
and introduced in summer 2015. Its functionality is closely related to
`eatRest` but adds some new features—for example, the support of 2pl and
partial credit models using the `TAM` and `mirt` packages and several
linking procedures for more than two times of measurement.

## Details

|          |            |
|----------|------------|
| Package: | eatModel   |
| Type:    | Package    |
| Version: | 0.10.9     |
| Date:    | 2026-03-18 |
| License: | GPL(\>=2)  |

## Author

Author/maintainer: Sebastian Weirich
\<sebastian.weirich@iqb.hu-berlin.de\>

## References

Adams, R. J., Wilson, M., & Wang, W.-C. (1997). The multidimensional
random coefficients multinomial logit model. *Applied Psychological
Measurement, 21*(1), 1-23.

Adams, R. J., & Wu, M. L. (2007). The Mixed-Coefficients Multinomial
Logit Model: A Generalized Form of the Rasch Model. In M. Von Davier &
C. H. Carstensen (Eds.), *Multivariate and Mixture Distribution Rasch
Models* (pp. 57-75). New York: Springer.

Robitzsch, A., Kiefer, T., & Wu, M. (2018). TAM: Test analysis modules.
R package version 2.13-15. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=TAM

Wu, M.L., Adams, R.J., Wilson, M.R., & Haldane, S.A. (2007). *ACER
ConQuest Version 2.0. Generalised Item Response Modeling Software.*
Camberwell, Victoria: ACER Press.
